Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Cognition
journalhomepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cognit
How decisions and the desire for coherency shape subjective preferences
over time
Adam N. Hornsbya,b,⁎, Bradley C. Loveb,c
aDunnhumby, 184 Shepherds Bush Road, London W6 7NL, United Kingdom
bDepartment of Experimental Psychology, University College London, London WC1H 0AP, United Kingdom
cThe Alan Turing Institute, United Kingdom

# ARTICLE INFO

Keywords:
Preference learning
Decision making
Intrinsic motivation
Free choiceChoice-induced preference changeABSTRACT
Recent findings suggest a bidirectional relationship between preferences and choices such that what is chosen
canbecomepreferred.Yet,itisstillcommonlyheldthatpreferencesforindividualitemsaremaintained,suchascaching a separate value estimate for each experienced option. Instead, we propose that all possible choice
options and preferences are represented in a shared, continuous, multidimensional space that supports gen-
eralization. Decision making is cast as a learning process that seeks to align choices and preferences to maintaincoherency. We formalized an error-driven learning model that updates preferences to align with past choices,which makes repeating those and related choices more likely in the future. The model correctly predicts that
making a free choice increases preferences along related attributes. For example, after choosing a political
candidate based on trivial information (e.g., they like cats), voters' views on abortion, immigration, and tradesubsequently shifted to match their chosen candidate.
1. Introduction
Every day, people are confronted with countless choices for which
there is no objectively correct answer. These tend to be either pre-
ferencejudgmentsormoraldecisions(Nakao,Ohira,&Northoff,2012).
Rather than being guided by extrinsic feedback, people choose these
options freely for themselves, using their subjective preferences. We
therefore refer to these choices as free choices. But how do people ac-
quire these subjective preferences in the first place? The aim of this
research is to understand the basis of people's subjective preferences.
Wemightlearnaboutourownpreferencesinthesamewaywelearn
about others'; by observing and then rationalizing behaviour (Bem,
1967, 1972; Cushman, 2019). This is because we tend to lack in-
trospective access to the mechanisms driving our behaviour, meaning
thatwehavetopost-rationalizeinordertomakesenseofit(Bem,1967,
1972;Mandler, 1975; Miller & Buckhout, 1973; Nisbett & Wilson,
1977).Inadramaticdemonstrationofthis,peoplehavebeentrickedbymischievous experimenters into justifying choices that they did not
actually make (Hall, Johansson, Tärning, Sikström, & Deutgen, 2010;
Sauerland et al., 2016; Strandberg, Sivén, Hall, Johansson, &
Pärnamets,2018).Forexample,afterchoosingtheirfavouriteflavourofjam in a taste test, participants were tricked into then justifying a dif-
ferent choice by experimenters, who covertly switched them mid-waythrough the experiment (Hall et al., 2010). Thus, rather than accessing
the reasons for their choices directly, people seem to retrospectively
infer them using evidence of their historic choices, even when that
evidence is not valid.
As well as facilitating the inference of preferences, past choices also
shapethem.Thishasbeendemonstratedinstudiesoffreechoice,which
show that after freely choosing an option, people tend to increase their
subjective preference for it (Akaishi, Umeda, Nagase, & Sakai, 2014;
Alos-Ferrer&Shi,2012; Ariely&Norton,2008; Brehm,1956; Chammat
et al., 2017; Cockburn, Collins, & Frank, 2014; Koster, Duzel, & Dolan,
2015;Miyagi, Miyatani, & Nakao, 2017; Nakao et al., 2016; Riefer,
Prior, Blair, Pavey, & Love, 2017; Schonberg et al., 2014; Sharot, De
Martino,&Dolan,2009; Vinckieretal.,2019; Voigt,Murawski,&Bode,
2017). In the original free-choice paradigm, Brehm (1956) asked par-
ticipantstorateasetofitems(e.g.snackproducts),choosebetweentwo
similarly rated options and finally to rate the full set again. Results
showed that after making the forced choice, they had an increased
preference for the chosen item on the final rating and a decreased
preference for the rejected item. This is surprising, because it suggests
that merely choosing or rejecting an option causes a person to update
their subjective preference for it.
Although there has been some debate as to the validity of the free-
choice paradigm in its original format, more recent studies have
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104244
Received 6 August 2019; Received in revised form 18 February 2020; Accepted 21 February 2020⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail address: adam.hornsby.10@ucl.ac.uk (A.N. Hornsby).Cognition 200 (2020) 104244
Available online 26 March 2020
0010-0277/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
T
suggested that choice-based learning is real. For example, one parti-
cular concern about the original paradigm was that the first rating
phase was noisy and therefore an imperfect measure of people's true
preferences(Chen&Risen,2010; Izuma&Murayama,2013).However,
researchers have since overcome this concern using various methodo-
logical adaptations, demonstrating choice-induced preference change
does occur (Akaishi et al., 2014; Alos-Ferrer & Shi, 2012; Koster et al.,
2015;Miyagi et al., 2017; Nakao et al., 2016; Schonberg et al., 2014;
Sharot, Velasquez, & Dolan, 2010; Vinckier et al., 2019) and can be
long-lasting (Sharot et al., 2009). For example, Sharot et al. (2010)
asked participants to blindly choose between masked holiday destina-
tions, which were only revealed to participants after one of two keys
had been pressed. Subsequent ratings of those destinations were con-
sistent with choice-induced preference change, even though choices
had been randomly assigned to participants. More recent analyses of
data collected from supermarket shoppers in-the-wild gives further
credence to the claim that choices are self-reinforcing. In particular, a
recent study of 283,000 British consumers found that their tendency to
repeat a choice (i.e., exploit) strengthened as a function of the number
of previous repetitions (Riefer et al., 2017). The consensus from studies
inside and outside the laboratory is that free choices appear to be self-
reinforcing, such that people come to prefer the options they choose.
Studies of free choice imply that people refer to past acceptances
and rejections to infer what they like and dislike (Akaishi et al., 2014;
Chammatetal.,2017; Cockburnetal.,2014; Izumaetal.,2010; Miyagi
etal.,2017; Rieferetal.,2017).Yet,weknowthatpeoplecanalsoinfer
thevalueofthingsthey'venevertried.Forexample,onecouldinferthat
they would not enjoy sky diving, despite having never tried it. How do
peopledothis?Ratherthancachingthevalueofindividualoptions(e.g.
beervarieties),peoplelikelyrepresentoptionsandpreferenceswithina
shared, continuous, multidimensional space (e.g., varieties of hop,
brandandbrewingstyle)(Hornsby,Evans,Riefer,Prior,&Love,2019).
Asdepictedin Fig.1,representingoptionsandpreferencesinthiswayis
beneficial,inthatitprovidesalower-dimensionallearningproblemand
allows one to infer the relative value of any option in their environ-
ment, irrespective of whether it has been tried.
Making free choices may therefore serve a considerably broader
function than first thought, helping us to learn more deeply about
ourselves and the world around us. Specifically, if options are re-
presented within the same attribute space, then free choices may help
to determine where one's preferences lie within that space. In this
paper, we propose that the position of one's preferences is determined
by a general, error-driven learning process, where the error term seeks
to make the last choice more likely to repeat. As well as increasing the
likelihood of past choices being repeated — as has been shown in real
supermarketconsumers(Rieferetal.,2017)—oneshouldalsoincrease
their preferences for other options to the extent that they are similarto
those previously chosen. While surprising, striving for internal coher-ency in this way may make sense in a world where choices can be
evaluated across a multitude of different criteria.
We begin by demonstrating how the intrinsic desire to maximize
coherency betweenpastchoicesandpresentpreferencescanelicitstrong
subjective preferences in the absence of extrinsic reinforcement. Inaccordance with our proposed theory, we develop a computational
cognitive model that learns preferences over choice attributes and uses
past choices as the basis for updating them. We call it the Coherency
Driven Choice (CDC) model. CDC is similar to models in the field of
human category learning, which are primarily concerned with classi-
fication of items into a set of mutually exclusive categories via their
attributes (e.g., using wings, beaks and feathers to describe birds)
(Kruschke, 1992; Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004; Nosofsky, 2011).
However,ratherthanupdatingbasedoncorrectivefeedback,ourmodelself-supervises using its past choices, thereby making them and similar
options morelikely to be sampled. Moreover, weuse these mechanisms
tomakedecisionsthatdonotinvolveanyfixedsetofclasses;themodel
chooses a set of items, which is not of fixed size. Through simulation,we show how this mechanism can drive complex, multidimensionalpreferencesfromfreechoicesalone.Thus,error-driven,self-supervision
helps the agent to maximize coherency between its preferences and
choices over time. As a result, CDC can achieve a sense of order inenvironments where there are innumerable possible options and di-
mensions by which to score them.
After presenting this formal demonstration of our theory, we vali-
date its predictions using a large-scale experiment of human partici-
pants. Chiefly, the error-driven nature by which CDC learns means that
it will update its preferences in order to maximize the perceived con-
trast between accepted and rejected options. This is analogous to
Preference Choice
Choice Preference
Preference Vector Choice Attributesa
cPreference Reward Choiceb
dFig. 1.Many popular models of decision-making cannot easily explain how
people form strong subjective preferences for free choices made in the wild. a,
In standard decision theory, it is assumed that preferences remain stable over
time (Glimcher, 2009; von Neumann, Morgenstern, & Rubinstein, 1944). In-
deed, for many researchers, the challenge is often learning what people's pre-
ferences are(e.g., by asking them to choose between options), rather than
understanding how they became.b, Reinforcement Learning (RL) models con-
trast in that they assume preferences change over time. Specifically, RL agentslearn to prefer actions with a higher expected reward, which they learn as theymonitor extrinsic feedback from their environment (Sutton & Barto, 1998).
While RL has been shown to account for many aspects of human learning well
(for a review, see Daw & Tobler, 2013), these investigations have been largely
confined to objective tasks, where there is a clear extrinsic signal steering the
decision-maker. c,Studiesoffreechoice—wherethereisnoobjectivelycorrect
answer — have shown that merely choosing an item increases one's preference
for it. This has often been taken to imply that free-choices are self-reinforcing,so as to increase preferences towards the chosen option. Yet, caching values in
thiswaywouldarguablynotscalewell,asitwouldrequirepeopletokeeptrack
of every item they'd ever tried. d, In this paper, we propose a novel theory of
subjectivepreferenceformationanddecisionmakingthatarguablyscalesbetter
to free choices made in the real world. According to this theory, people encode
preferencesoverattributesoffreechoices,suchasthehopcontentinbeer.Aftermaking a decision, they then update their preferences in the direction of the
attributesthatdefinedtheirpriorchoice,therebyincreasingtheirpreferencefor
it, as well as for other options that have similar attributes.A.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

contrastive learning effects documented within the field of category
learning, where the experience of contrasting category exemplars
causes perceived category averages to drift apart and become idealized
(Davis & Love, 2010). Results from Experiment 1 demonstrated that
people update their preferences in a similar way following a choice.
Specifically, participants were shown to prefer never-before-seen pat-
terns if they happened to be on the back of a toy robot they had just
designed. The more discriminating the pattern was to the initial robot,
the more likely they were to prefer it.
Whereas Experiment 1 concerned preference formation in a novel
and well-controlled domain, Experiment 2 evaluated the model's pre-
dictions in a domain in which people hold strong, preexisting pre-
ferences. In particular, Experiment 2 evaluated whether participants
would retrospectively update their political beliefs following a vote.
Results revealed that after choosing between two electoral candidates
based on trivial grounds (e.g., whether they liked cats or dogs), parti-
cipants were more likely to agree with a political belief later revealed
by their chosen candidate, irrespective of whether that belief was tra-
ditionally left or right wing (e.g., pro-choice vs. pro-life abortion
rights). Thus, these results support the key claims of our proposed
theory, in that they suggest that people retrospectively update their
preferences to be coherent with their past choices. Significantly, this
even occurs in domains where people possess strong prior preferences
that likely have strong subjective significance.
2. The coherency driven choice (CDC) model
We begin by formally describing our model of subjective preference
learning and decision making.
Broadlyspeaking,themodelworksbymaintaininganinternalsetof
preferences and attention weights for attributes across choices. For
example, all products in a supermarket can be described in terms of
nutritional attributes such as salt, sugar and saturated fat content.
Individuals will possess different preferences for those attributes, and
pay differing levels of attention to them. These preferences and atten-
tionweightsareusedtodeterminehowfavourableachoiceisatagiven
timepoint. In particular, the higher the attention-weighted similarity,
the more likely it will be to choose that option. Our model can be
thought of as an agent interacting with its environment. Much like a
reinforcement learning agent, the model takes an action, observes its
environment, updates its internal state and then repeats the process.
Here we introduce some important notation relevant to the model's
decision making process. Note that vectors will now be denoted in bold
lowercase letters and matrices in bold uppercase letters. We denote the
observation of choices in the environment using the matrix O, which
has a shape of N×M. Here, Ndenotes the number of choices available
O= [o1,o2, …,oN]Tat a given timestep. For simplicity of notation, we
assume that the model must choose between two items at any one time(i.e.N=2). However — in principle — the model is not constrained to
this.Mdenotes the number of attributes for each option. Thus, each
column o
i(i∈{1,...N}) isa vectorof Mattributes oi= [o i1,oi2,…,oiM].
Therefore, the element oijcorresponds to the jth attribute (j ∈{1,...M})
of the ith item.
2.1.1. Preference similarity
In order to determine the most appropriate choice, the model first
calculates a probability over the available options observed in Ousing
the preference vector p= [p1,p2, …,pM]Tand the attention weight
vector w= [w1,w2, …,wM]T. Each element of the preference and at-
tention weight vectors pjandwjmaps to an attribute jin the attribute
vector oij.
After sampling an option from the environment, the agent must
updatethepreferenceandattentionweightvectors.Wenowdiscusstheprocess of computing probabilities, selecting actions and updatingvectors in more detail.
2.1.2. Choice probabilities
In order to determine the probability of an action, the model cal-
culates an attention-weighted similarity between the preference vector
and each of the N= 2 item vectors o
iwithin the observation matrix O.
We denote the attention-weighted similarity as a(oi)
=a o w o p ( ) ( ) i
jM
j ij j

(1)
where γis a scaling hyperparameter. Note that this weighted
Euclideansimilarityterm isverysimilarto theoneused inthe ALCOVE
model of human category learning (Kruschke, 1992).
In order to determine the probability of selecting an option i, the
attention-weighted similarity a(oi) is then fed into a softmax function
=
=f o I O softmax a Oa o
a o( ) ( | ) ( ( ))exp ( )
exp ( )i i ii
kN
k 1
(2)
Thus, the preference a(oi) for an option is a function of three things:
1. The similarity (i.e. Euclidean distance) between the preference
vector pand the choice attribute vector oi— The more similar the
attributes and corresponding preference values, the more the modelprefers that option
2. The attention weight vector w— A higher degree of attention to-
wardsasimilarityleadstoagreaterimpactontheoverallpreference
3. The scaling hyperparameter γ— The higher the γ, the higher the
probability for selecting the preferred option (when using softmaxaction selection)
Similar to more traditional models, preferences are represented as
ideal-points within a multidimensional space (Greenhoff & Mac Fie,1994). However, unlike many of those methods, the model can have
varying levels of attention to those according to the attention weights
and — crucially — describes how preferences update over time as a
consequence of decision making.
2.1.3. Action selection
Choices can be selected using one of the many popular strategies
used in RL, such as ε-greedy, softmax action selection (Sutton & Barto,
1998) or more sophisticated directed-exploration strategies (e.g., un-
certainty minimization). In each case, higher probabilities for choices(i.e. stronger preferences) increase the likelihood of exploiting that
known favourite, rather than exploring disfavoured options. When
using softmax selection specifically, the λparameter can be thought of
as determining the “fussiness” of the agent's choices, such that higher λ
equates to a higher likelihood of choosing the favourite. We denote the
choice made by the agent as c.
2.1.4. Updating preference and attention-weight vectors
Following an action, the agent must then update its preference and
attention weight vectors. As discussed in the main text, a battery ofpsychological research has shown that — in subjective choice domains
where there is no explicit feedback — preferences tend to follow
choices. We therefore update the preference and attention weight
vectors so as to maximize the likelihood of the previous choice. This
contrasts sharply with traditional preference models, which seldom
specify how preferences may change over time (DeSarbo & Kim, 2012;
Greenhoff & Mac Fie, 1994).
The exact learning procedure used to update the preference and
attention weight vectors is gradient descent on the cross-entropy loss,similar to that used during backpropagation and in the neural network
literature generally (Goodfellow, Bengio, & Courville, 2016; Hinton,
McClelland, & Rumelhart, 1986). During the learning procedure, anA.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

action is determined probabilistically using the softmax choice rule.
After the action, the cross-entropy loss is calculated between the pre-
ference probabilities output by the model f(oi) and the actual choice c
that was made.
== l c log f f O o ( ( ), ) 1 ( ( ))
iN
c i i
1{ }
(3)
After making an action, the preference and attention weights are
updated so as to minimize the cross-entropy error. Concretely, they areupdated proportionally to the negative of the error gradient.
We therefore use the following calculation to find the partial deri-
vative of the preference vector pwith respect to the cross-entropy loss:
==l f c
pw fao pOoo(( ), )(1 ( ))1
( )( )
jj
iN
c i i
iij j2
1{ }
(4)
And the following calculation to find the partial derivative of the
attention weight vector wwith respect to the cross-entropy loss:
==l c
wfao pf Ooo( ( ), )
2(1 ( ))1
( )( )
jiN
c i i
iij j2
1{ }2(5)
We then use these partial derivatives to update the existing pre-
ference and attention weight vectors using gradient descent.
Concretely, we define the following update rules for the vectors pand
w, respectively:
l c
pp pf O( ( ), )
p
j
(6)
l c
ww wf O( ( ), )
w
j
(7)
where ηpand ηwrepresent the learning rates for the preference and
attention weight vectors, respectively. As is standard during gradient
descent, these learning rates scale the updated vectors and thus de-
termine the magnitude of the update at a given time step.
evaluate 
optionspreferenc e
similaritychoice
preferencesoption a option b“option a”
attention
weightsx
attention weighted
preferences=3%previous
preference
choice
i ii iiia b
c
S1
S2
S3
S4a b
a b
a b
b ad eFig.2.Toillustratehowthistheorycanmaterializeinstrongsubjectivepreferences,weformalizeitinacomputationalcognitivemodel,knownasCoherencyDriven
Choice (CDC). a, CDC possesses a preference and attention-weight vector. When evaluating options, the model evaluates the similarity between its own attention-
weightedpreferenceandtheattributesoftheavailableoptions.Thecloseranoption'sattributesaretothemodel'sattention-weightedpreferences,themorelikelythe
modelistoselectit. b,Followingachoice,CDCupdatesitspreferencevectortomakethepastchoicemostlikelyusinggradientdescent,therebymovingtowardsthe
prior choicein attributespace. c, CDCalso adjustsitsattention weightsto makepriorchoicemore likely,effectively warping thepreferencespaceso that it becomes
more sensitive to the attended attribute. d, As the model grows to prefer the options it initially chose, it tends to repeat the same choice type more over time. e, The
modelwassimulatedfor10,000timestepsinasimpleenvironmentinwhichthereweretwochoicetypes.Duetohappenstanceintheinitialchoices,themodelbegan
to prefer choice type a, adjusting its preferences and attention weights in favour of the attributes that make it unique. The preference history is coloured by attention
weight ratio, such that blacker colors indicate a greater deal of attention paid towards attribute 2.A.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

3. Simulating free choices demonstrates how strong preferences
can be learned over time
To illustrate how one could learn strong subjective preferences by
virtue of their choice trajectory, we simulated the CDC model. In the
simulated environment, there were two choice types that did not vary
onthefirstdimensionbutvariedsignificantlyontheseconddimension.
This is analogous to choosing between two beer brands that are similar
in taste but contrast in the colour of branding.
3.1. Method
3.1.1. Simulation
Observations in the environment were randomly sampled from
distributions of two clusters. Choice type ahad a cluster centroid of
(0.2,0.8) while choice type b had a cluster centroid of (0.2,0.2). The
standard deviation of each cluster was determined apriori to be 0.05;
thereby making the two choice types linearly separable. A total of 500
observations were simulated.
The agent was initialised with middling preferences and attention
weights across the two attributes of (0.5,0.5). It was also set to have a
learning rate of 0.01, ε=0.05 and λ=1. Choices were simulated for
10,000 timesteps. At each timestep, the agent was forced to choosebetween two randomly-selectedoptions fromeach choice typeusing an
ε-greedy action selection strategy.
Choosing these parameters over a large number of timesteps helped
the learningprocess to be smooth and stable across the agent's lifespan.
This is therefore more representative of what might happen over a
timescale of several years. However, it should be noted that the same
learning trajectory documented below could be found using a larger
learning rate over a shorter number of timesteps, though many such
situations would not involve complete movement towards a goal.
3.2. Results and discussion
A visualization of this model and the results of this simulation are
shown in Fig. 2.
After simulating 10,000 forced-choices, CDC eventually came to
possespreferencesresemblingthefirstchoicetype(i.e., type a).Afteran
initial sequence of random actions, CDC began to quickly develop a
preferenceinretrospectofthem,andthusselectchoicesconsistentwith
this new-found preference. This process was then self-reinforcing, fur-
ther strengthening preferences and therefore the likelihood for choice
type aover time. Thus, when consumers become less likely to explore
new products the more they exploit the same, it may be because their
preferences are being self-reinforced by their past choices, as shown in
this simulation (Riefer et al., 2017).
Uniquely, as CDC chose more of choice type a, the preferences and
attention of the model moved most in favour of the attributes of the
choice that made it unique. This is a known consequence of dis-
crimination learning, but uniquely demonstrated here within the con-
text of subjective preference change (Davis & Love, 2010; Ramscar,
Yarlett, Dye, Denny, & Thorpe, 2010; Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). Ex-
aggerating preferences in this way helped the model to maximize the
perceived contrast between the accepted and rejected choices. This
increasesthelikelihoodofthepastchoicetypebeingsampledagainand
reduces the likelihood of the rejected option being selected. Continuing
the example introduced above, this suggests that a person will have an
over-exaggerated preference towards the unique branding of their
preferred beer, helping to retrospectively justify their apparent pre-
ference.
Of course, when formalizing a cognitive theory, one must make
some assumptions about the world. For example, in the case presented
here, one could argue that people do not always have complete
knowledge of the attributes describing each option at the time of de-
cision. Indeed, one may need to taste a product to know how salty it is,ortheymayvoteforapoliticalcandidatebeforelearningoftheirstanceon free-trade. In this case, our model would simply use a placeholder
for their preference on that particular attribute. Upon revelation of the
attributevaluefortheirpriorchoice(e.g.,discoveringhowsaltyasnack
was), they would then move their preference towards the attribute
point in question.
Inreality,peopleareunlikelytodeveloppreferencesasexaggerated
astheoneslearnedinthissimulation.Thisisbecausechoicesinreallife
are often more innumerate, multidimensional and overlapping. The
highdegreeofsimilaritybetweenoptionsintherealworldwouldcause
our agent to explore more, and thereby develop a less extreme set of
preferences. The environment may also provide additional sources of
noiseduringdecisionmakingthatelicitexplorationandthusmovement
of preferences in new directions. For example, a preferred product may
be out-of-stock in a store, a person may develop a new allergy or travel
to a new country. Rather than attempt to account for the multitude of
ways in which preferences change as a function of choices in-the-wild,
the aim of this simulation was to highlight a important consequence of
the coherency maximizing mechanism proposed here; namely, that
preferences are updated in order to discriminate the choice just made.
4. People prefer novel patterns associated with their prior choice
The new account proposed in this paper suggests that by learning
preferences over attributes of choices, people can generalize their pre-
ferences to novel options that are associated with ones previously chosen.
Moreover, similar to error-driven models developed in the field of cate-
gory learning (Davis & Love, 2010), it predicts that people will update
their preferences in the direction of the most discriminative elements of
their choice, in order to maximize the likelihood it being repeated.
Experiment1aimedtovalidatethesepredictions.Here,participants
were askedto design a robot(the trial flowis depictedin Fig. 3a).They
were then introduced to a second robot, before both turned aroundrevealingpreviouslyunseen,randomlyassignedpatternsontheirbacks.
Finally, participants were asked to choose between three patterns; one
that was unique to the back of the robot they had previously designed
(i.e. chosen unique), another that was shared across the backs of the
two robots and a final pattern that was unique to the back of the robot
they had not designed (i.e. non-chosen). It was hypothesized that —
consistent with a discriminative account of learning — participants
would prefer those novel patterns to the extent that they were uniquely
associated with the robot they had just designed.
4.1. Method
4.1.1. Participants
One thousand and three participants were recruited from Amazon
Mechanical Turk (mturk). Mturk (www.mturk.com) is generally known
for being an inexpensive source of reliable human data (Crump,
McDonnell, & Gureckis, 2013, though see McDuffie (2019) for a dis-
cussion on the possible limitations). Participants were required to havecompleted >1000 tasks (or HITs) and have an acceptance rate >95%.
Participants had to be based in the US or Canada. Data from 37 parti-cipants were removed due to having an average response time two
standard deviations greater than the mean (> 17.64 s). The mean age
of the participants was 37.0 (SD = 11.4) and 50.2% were male. Par-
ticipants were paid 50 for participating, which is typical for mturk(Horton & Chilton, 2010). Overall, the experiment took about 10 min.

4.1.2. Design
The experiment used a between-groups design with 10 trials.
Participants either chose a pattern that belonged to the back of the
1Both experiments presented here were in compliance with UCL's code of
ethicsA.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

robot they previously designed (i.e., chosen-unique), the one they did
not design (i.e., non-chosen) or was shared across both. The dependent
variable was therefore the sum of the preferences over each of the
choice types across each of the 10 trials.
4.1.3. Apparatus & stimuli
The study was designed using JavaScript and was accessed in a web
browser. The task was presented in a 700 × 700 pixel screen. During
the designphaseofthe experiment,participantsrespondedby choosing
attributes fromadrop-downbox. Whenstatingtheirdesign preferences
inthefinalphase,participantswereaskedtoclickeachrobotinorderof
their preference (from highest to lowest).
Each robot was designed using the Support Vector Graphics (SVG)
format. These robots had a front — which could be designed by parti-
cipants — and a back, which contained randomly-assigned patterns.
During the design phase, participants could design three aspects of
thefrontoftheirrobot;thestomachtexture,thevisorbordercolourand
the eye colour. In each trial, participants could choose between two
randomly-selected options for each design aspect.
In the final phase of each trial, participants were shown multi-
coloured geometric patterns. In total, there were three patterns per
trial, randomly selected from one of 50 possible triplets. One pattern
appeared on one random half of the back of the robot they had pre-
viously designed. Another pattern appeared on one random half of the
back of the robot they had not designed. The final design was shared
such that it appeared on both remaining halves of the two turned ro-
bots.
4.1.4. Procedure
Participants were initially briefed about the experiment in order to
get their informed consent and asked to supply their age and gender.
They were told that the task would take about 10 min and would re-
quire them to design robots and make choices. On each trial, partici-
pants were shown a robot with a randomly selected name and asked to
designit.Thehopewasthatbydesigningtherobot,theywouldbecome
more motivated about their choice, increasing ecological validity. They
could choose between one of two randomly selected options for each of
the three design aspects. After completing the design, participants were
then introduced to a new, frowning anti-robot. This anti-robot was de-
signed using all the attributes that the participant had previously es-
chewed. In addition, participants were warned that the anti-robot did
not like the participants' design. They were then asked to reassure theirown robot by clicking on it. Henceforth, we refer to this anti-robot asthenon-chosen option. This is because it was uniquely designed using
elements that had been explicitly rejected during the previous phase ofthe trial. After clicking on their own robot, both robots then turned
around revealing randomized patterns on their backs (described
above). The two robots then moved to the back of the screen. Three
patterns — either shared across both or unique to one of the robots at
the back of the screen — then appeared at the front of the screen and
participantswereaskedtochoosetheirfavouriteinorderofpreference.
Participants completed 10 such trials with patterns, robot names, and
other trial details randomized for each trial, they were debriefed,
thanked for their participation and paid immediately.
4.2. Results and discussion
A repository for all data described in this paper is available on OSF
([dataset] Hornsby & Love, 2019).
The proportion of times each image type was selected as a first,
second and third preference is pictured in Fig. 3b. As hypothesized,
participants most preferred the unique chosen pattern, followed by the
shared pattern and finally, the non-chosen pattern (omnibus non-
parametric Friedman test of differences among repeated-measures
χ
2=137.48,p<0.001). Specifically, summed preferences for the
chosen-unique patterns (Median = 9, IQR= 4.0) were stronger than
that for the shared items (Median = 9, IQR= 3.0) (Wilcoxon signed-
rank Z= − 2.91, p<0.005,r=0.09) and the non-chosen items
(Median = 11, IQR= 5.0) (Z = − 12.08, p<0.001,r=0.39). A final
test also revealed that preferences for the shared items were stronger
than that for non-chosen items (Z = − 11.70, p<0.001,r=0.38).2
These results supported our two key hypotheses and therefore the
key claims of our theory. Firstly, participants exhibited an increased
preference for the chosen-unique and shared patterns, demonstrating
that they generalized their preference learned from the initial choice to
the novel patterns by virtue of their association. Consistent with the
behaviourofourmodelformalization,peopleappeartogeneralizetheir
preferences to novel items that share attributes with choices just made.
Secondly,participantsdemonstratedanincreasedpreferenceforthe
chosen-unique pattern over the shared pattern and a reduced
chosennon
chosendesign reveal preference
timea b cwhich do 
you prefer?a bFig.3. a, Thetrialsequenceobservedby participants.First,participantswereintroducedtoarobot andaskedtodesign aspectsofit.Theywerethenintroducedtoa
new robot, which was designed differently. These robots then turned around, revealing random patterns on their backs. One pattern was unique to the robot
participants'hadpreviouslydesigned(i.e.,chosen-unique),onewassharedacrossbothrobots(i.e.,shared)andtheotherwasuniquetotherobottheyhadpreviously
eschewed (i.e., non-chosen). Participants were then asked to rank the patterns in order of preference. b, This chart depicts the proportion that each image type was
chosenasafirst,secondandthirdpreference(withstandarderrorbars).Theseresultsareconsistentwiththetheorypresentedhere,whichpredictsthatchoice-basedlearning generalizes most strongly to the unique, most-discriminating feature of the original choice (i.e., chosen unique), followed by the shared feature.
2All Wilcoxon-signed rank tests were evaluated against a Holm-Bonferroni
corrected alpha value for multiple comparisonsA.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

preference for the pattern unique to the rejected option. This is con-
sistent with discriminative accounts of learning, in that it suggests that
people update their preference towards attributes that discriminate
their prior choices. Studies of human categorization have shown that
experiencing contrasting category exemplars causes their perceived
difference to drift apart and become idealized. For example, because
people are used to contrasting diet foods with high calorie foods, they
are more likely to suggest celery as a prototypical diet food, even
though it is extreme for its category (Davis & Love, 2010). Choosing
freelybetweenoptionsappearstohavesimilareffectsduringpreference
learning, in that preferences update to maximize the perceived contrast
between the accepted and rejected options. This functions to maintain
coherence between past choices and present preferences.
5. People adjust their existing political beliefs to be consistent
with their prior vote
The experimental results presented so far have provided controlled,
experimental support for our error-driven account of subjective pre-ference formation and decision making. Outside the lab however,
people usually have strong prior preferences for options, which likely
interacts with their intrinsic tendency to coherency maximize.
The aim of Experiment 2 was therefore to explore the extent to
which people retrospectively update their existing preferences fol-
lowing a free choice. Specifically, we evaluated whether people would
modify their political beliefs after a vote. Participants from the U.S.
were shown two political candidates and asked to vote for one, based
on some trivial attributes (e.g., whether they liked cats or dogs).
3This
experimentalprocedureis depictedin Fig.4a.Followingthevote,these
chosen and non-chosen political candidates revealed randomly as-
signed, opposing controversial beliefs on a particular topic. These be-
liefs were either traditionally left or right-wing. For example, if ran-
domlyassignedtotheabortionissue,thechosencandidatewouldeither
show “Abortion: Pro-choice” or “Abortion: Pro-life”. Participants werethen asked to state the extent to which they agreed with their chosen
candidate's newly revealed belief using a slider. Finally, they were
asked to state their preferred party out of the Democrats or Repub-
licans.
Our primary hypothesis was that people would show higher levels
ofagreementfortheright-wingview(e.g.,pro-choiceabortionrights)if
their chosen candidate revealed support for that view, compared to the
left-wing view. This would provide support for the theory presented
here and suggest that,following a vote,people are prone to adjust their
political beliefs to be coherent with their chosen candidate.
While expecting that people would feel inclined to agree with their
chosen candidate's newly revealed opinion, we also secondarily hy-
pothesized that this would vary depending on individual differences.
Specifically, we expected that different individuals would be more or
less prone to updating their preferences retrospectively, due to differ-
ences in their longstanding political beliefs. Due to its simplicity, we
used people's preferred political party affiliation as an indirect measure
of these beliefs and subsequently predicted that Republican-identifying
participants would be more likely to update their beliefs to be coherent
withtheirinitialvote.Thiswasfortwomainreasons.Firstly,duetothe
broad and unpredictable nature of being in power, voters in support
mostlikelyhavetoacceptmorecompromisesandadjusttheirbeliefson
occasion in order to remain coherent. Secondly, results from self-re-
ported surveys suggest that conservatives value coherency compara-
tivelymorewhenmakingpoliticaldecisions(e.g.theyhavebeenshown
to value loyalty to the in-group and to authority comparatively more
Mendez, 2017; Haidt & Graham, 2007; Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski, &
Sulloway, 2003). While this is a somewhat secondary prediction thatdoesnotdirectlyflowfromourcoretheory,weusedExperiment2asan
initial exploration of group differences across domains.
5.1. Method
5.1.1. Participants
One thousand participants were recruited using mturk. All partici-
pants were required to have had at least 1000 of their previous tasks
accepted on mturk, have a 95% mturk task acceptance rate and be
based in the United States. All participants were paid 50 for partici-
pating. Of the participants, 47 were removed due to a lack of apparent
concentrationorunderstandingofthetask.Specifically,45participants
were removed for having response times more than two standard de-
viations from the mean for the vote response (n=26, >38.68s) and the
slider response (n=19, >55.38s). A further 2 participants were re-
moved for clicking >50 times during the whole experiment. Of the
final 953 participants, 50.26% were male, 49.53% were female and the
remainder specified as ‘other’. The mean age was 37.44 (SD = 11.67).
Of the participants, 64.53% said they affiliated more closely withDemocrats, whereas the remainder said they affiliate more closely with
Republicans. Data was collected in late July 2018.
5.1.2. Design
The experiment used a 2 × 2 between-groups design. The experi-
ment involved one trial. Participants either chose a candidate that —
previouslyunbeknownsttothem—revealedamoreleft-wingviewora
more right-wing view. Furthermore, participants either affiliated more
closelywithDemocratsorRepublicans.Thedependentvariablewasthe
slider value of the participant, normalized by political direction.
Specifically, these values ranged from 1 to 100, where higher values
indicated more agreement with the right-wing view and lower values
indicated more agreement with the more left-wing view. Note that the
initial vertical location of the candidates, the allocation of neutral and
controversial attributes, and the final horizontal locations of the can-
didates were all fully randomized.
5.1.3. Apparatus & stimuli
The study was designed using JavaScript and was accessed in a web
browser. The task was presented in a 1000 pixel wide screen.
Participants were shown two of a possible four faces taken from the
Chicago Face Database (Ma, Correll, & Wittenbrink, 2015).
4To control
for noise emerging from other, well-documented biases, all faces were
controlled to be male, Caucasian and ranging between the ages of 37
and 43. Faces were randomly assigned one of four names. These were
either James Smith, Michael Johnson, John Williams, Graham Brown.
These names were sourced from a list of the most popular first and
second Caucasian names in the United States.
The neutral opinions of participants are shown in Table 1. The
controversial political opinions of participants are shown in Table 2.
5.1.4. Procedure
Participants were initially briefed about the purpose of the experi-
ment in order to get their informed consent. They were told that the
task would take about 5 min to complete and would require them to
vote for political candidates. After the briefing, participants began the
trial. To first ensure that the participants were alert, they were told to
read a short experimental briefing. Within this briefing was the in-
structionto clickon thename of theuniversity (which was displayedat
the top of the screen). After clicking this, a new panel was revealed
displayingsometext(“It'stimetovoteforacandidate!Pleaseclickona
candidate to vote”) and two political candidates in gray cards; one
above the other. Within each card and underneath the candidate's
3More information about the experimental design and stimuli is available in
the methods section4These faces can be identified in the Chicago Face Database using the target
codes WM-023, WM-221, WM-223 and WM-248A.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

c
da b
“I like cats”
“I like dogs”Please vote for 
your candidate
“Pro-choice” “Pro-life”Your candidate has 
revealed an opinion
timevote reveal pref erence
How much do you agree with 
revealed opinion?
“Pro-life” “Pro-choice”Fig. 4. a, Participants were initially asked to vote for a candidate based on trivial characteristics. Both candidates then revealed opposing beliefs on a more
controversial belief. Participants were then asked to rate how much they agreed with their candidate's newly revealed opinion. b, If voting for the candidate affects
the extent to which participants agree with the later-revealed political belief, then one would expect participants to show different levels of agreement betweengroups, depending on whether their candidate revealed a traditionally left-wing view or a right-wing view. c, The results of the experiment are shown in kernel
density plots (with rugplots below to depict the individual data points). These reveal that Republican-identifying participants were particularly prone to adjusting
their preference to be in accordance with that revealed by their chosen candidate. d, Plotting effect sizes for each per-topic comparison shows that Republican-
identifying participants were particularly prone to adjusting their preferences.
Table 1
A summary of the neutral statements shown to participants.
Topic Statements
Pets “I like cats”
“I like dogs”
Sport “I'm a baseball fan”
“I'm a basketball fan”
Food “My favourite Italian food is pizza”“My favourite Italian food is spaghetti”Table 2
A summary of the controversial statements revealed by candidates following avote.
Topic Left-wing Right-wing
Abortion “Abortion: Pro-choice” “Abortion: Pro-life”
Immigration “I support policies that would
increase immigration”“I support policies that would
decrease immigration”
Trade “I support tariffs on imports” “I support free trade”A.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

photographs were their name and then a list of “My opinions”. These
lists initially displayed opposing neutral opinions selected from the
same neutral topic, as shown in Table 1. The assignments of photo-
graphs, names, neutral topics and vertical alignment were all rando-mized.Participantswereaskedtovoteforacandidateusingthisneutral
information by clicking on their card. After voting, the cards then
moved to a left or right position on the screen, aligning horizontally
with each other. This horizontal allocation was also randomized. The
voted and non-voted candidates then immediately revealed opposing
political opinions from the same topic in their list of opinions. A blue
“New”buttondrewattentiontothisnewly-revealedbelief.Thewindow
then moved down to reveal a new section, containing some text and a
slider. The text informed participants in bold lettering that “Your can-
didatehasrevealedanewopinionabove!Howmuchdoyouagreewith
your candidate's newly revealed opinion?” Participants were prompted
to use the new slider to state the extent to which they agreed with the
candidates' newly revealed opinions. Small avatars of the candidate's
faces were shown on either side of the slider, with a gray tick or white
cross below the ones that were previously chosen, respectively. There
were also prompts below each avatar reminding participants of the
newly revealed controversial opinion of the candidate. Note that the
slider wasnotinitialized withanystartingvalue.Slidingcloser towards
the chosen candidates indicated higher levels of agreement with that
candidate. The slider had 100 possible positions. The photographs,
names, neutral and political opinions and left/right direction of
movement were all randomly assigned between participants.
Afterconfirmingthesliderposition,participantswereaskedtostate
which party they most affiliated with (Democrat or Republican), their
genderandtheirage.Followingtaskcompletion,theywerethankedfor
their participation and paid immediately.
5.2. Results and discussion
In support of the primary hypotheses, results revealed that partici-
pants' stated degree of belief was significantly influenced by the ran-
domly-assigned belief revealed by their chosen candidate (non-para-
metric two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (F (1, 952) = 28.89,
p< 0.001, CL = 0.563). In particular, those that voted for a candidate
thatlaterrevealed aright-wingopinion(Median=56.0,IQR=76.00)agreed an average of 43.59% more with the right-wing view compared
to if the candidate later revealed a left-wing view (Median = 39.0,
IQR = 69.75). This suggests that choosing a political candidate based
oninitiallytrivialcharacteristicsmadeparticipantsmorelikelytoagree
with that candidate's later-revealed controversial opinion, irrespective
of whether the person self-identified as a Democrat or Republican.
In support of the secondary hypothesis, there was also a significant
interaction between party affiliation and the degree of agreement with
the right-wing view (F(1, 952) = 11.77, p< 0.001). A first Mann-
Whitney Utest looking at the responses of self-identifying Democrats
revealed that they only slightly increased their level of agreement for
the right-wing view if their candidate revealed a right-wing view
(Median= 40.0, IQR= 78.00) compared to if it revealed a left-wing
view (Median = 31.5, IQR= 65.75); this difference was not significant
(U= 43,584.5, p= 0.054), and had a very low effect size
(CL= 0.518). In contrast, the second test looking at Republican-iden-
tifying participants revealed a larger effect, in that — if one's candidate
later revealed a more right-wing opinion — they were 65.66% more in
agreement with the the right-wing view (Median = 82.0, IQR= 59.75)
compared to when the candidate revealed a more left-wing view(Median = 49.50, IQR= 70.25) (U = 10,131.5, p< 0.001,
CL=0.629).
5Thus,Republican-identifyingparticipantsappearedtobe
particularly prone to adjusting their beliefs so as to be consistent withtheir last choice, even when this choice was based on trivial grounds
(e.g., the fact that their candidate liked cats).
It is notable that self-identified Republicans were particularly
willing to adjust their preferences to be coherent with their prior
choices.Forexample,theirmediansupportforpro-lifeabortionpolicies
was 60% higher when their chosen candidate later expressed support
for pro-life policies (Median = 96.0, IQR= 61.50) compared to pro-
choice policies (Median = 60.0, IQR= 88.00) (the remaining within-
topic comparisons are depicted in Fig. 4c and 4d, and described in the
supplemental). One possibility is that only Republican-identifyingparticipants adjust their preferences to be consistent with a choice,
across all domains. To confirm that this was not the case, we replicated
the first experiment, asking about party affiliation at the end of the
study. Results revealed that both self-identifying Democrat and Re-
publicanparticipantsexhibitedpreferencesforthefinalpatterninways
consistent with the reported findings above (see the supplemental for
details). Thus, a more likely explanation of our results is that there are
group and domain differences guiding the extent to which people learn
from theirpast choices. For example — as discussed in the introduction
to this section — differences in people's belief systems may give rise to
different propensities to adjust preferences following a choice. Clearly
these topics are deserving of future investigation in light of the results
presented here.
6. General discussion
Inthis article, weproposed a novel account of subjectivepreference
formation and decision making. In our model, choice options and pre-
ferences are represented in a common continuous, multi-dimensional
space. When people choose options within this space, their preferences
are updated to increase the likelihood of their previous choices. The
objective of decision making is therefore to reduce the error between
one's past choices and present preferences; we refer to this general
mechanism as coherency maximization. Consistent with patterns of re-
peat-purchasing observed in supermarket consumers (Riefer et al.,
2017) and studies of choice-induced preference change (Akaishi et al.,
2014;Alos-Ferrer & Shi, 2012; Ariely & Norton, 2008; Brehm, 1956;
Chammatetal.,2017; Cockburnetal.,2014; Kosteretal.,2015; Miyagi
et al., 2017; Nakao et al., 2016; Schonberg et al., 2014; Sharot et al.,
2009;Vinckieretal.,2019; Voigtetal.,2017),coherencymaximization
boosts the likelihood of past choices being repeated by shifting pre-
ferences towards the chosen item and away from rejected alternatives.
As was shown in a simple simulation, this mechanism can drive strong
subjective preferences in the absence of extrinsic feedback. Thus, our
model is well-suited to navigating the complex choices encountered in
everyday life.
Following from this account, one would expect preferences to be
exaggerated towards attributes that favoured the past choice and di-
minished towards attributes associated with rejected choices. Results
from the first experiment showed that preferences are updated in ac-
cordance with these predictions. Concretely, the more uniquely asso-
ciatedanovelpatternwastothebackofatoyrobottheyhadpreviously
designed, the more likely participants were to prefer it. Given that we
tend to lack direct introspective access to the mechanisms driving our
behaviour, post-rationalizing choices may be a reasonable way to make
sense of ourselves and the world around us (Bem, 1967, 1972;
Cushman, 2019; Mandler, 1975; Miller & Buckhout, 1973; Nisbett &
Wilson, 1977). Our model shows that simple learning processes canachievesimilarendsbyupdatingunderlyingpreferencestoalignwitha
choice.
These learning rules can be seen as reflecting an internal drive for
internal consistency, which is pivotal to rational models of decisionmaking(Savage,1954).Forexample,itisoftenassumedthatsubjective
choices should be stochastically transitive (Schultz, Dayan, &
Montague, 1997). When preferences are not transitive, people can be-
comeliabletomanipulation(or“dutchbooking”)(Davidson,McKinsey,
5Forallmultiplecomparisonsreportedinthispaper,significancevalueswere
compared against a Holm-Bonferroni corrected αvalueA.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

& Suppes, 1955). For example, if out of three beers, a person prefers
beer A over B, beer B over C but would rather have C than A, their
preferences are cyclical. This person could be tricked into paying for a
seriesofcostlytradesinwhichthedrinkerendedwithhisoriginalbeer.
In subjective domains, internal consistency may be at times the only
rational strategy that is feasible.
The second experiment explored how the tendency to maximize
coherency interacted with people's prior preferences. The results in-
dicated that after voting for a political candidate based on trivial cri-
teria (e.g., the candidate likes cats), participants were more likely to
agreewithacontroversialopinionlaterrevealedbythecandidate,such
as their stance on abortion rights. This held up as a main effect, sup-
porting our claim that people retrospectively update their preferences
over attributes of their past choices to make them more likely. The fact
that this was particularly pronounced for Republican-identifying par-
ticipants supported our secondary hypothesis that this mechanism can
vary between groups, consistent with previous studies demonstrating
individual differences in choice-induced preference change (Cockburn
et al., 2014). However, while individual differences may partly explain
our results, it is likely that other variables outside the scope of our
theory also influence decisions, such as how important affiliation is to
differentgroups.Specifically,whileRepublican-identifyingparticipants
adjusted their preferences more than their Democrat-identifying coun-
terparts in the second experiment, a replication of the first experiment
(see Supplement) revealed no difference between the groups when
choosing between novel options. In future research, the prominence of
choice-induced preference change within certain groups or domains
could be estimated by fitting the CDC model to different decision tasks.
If people update their preferences to be coherent with their past
choices, then why might they also feel motivated to explore? A recent
analysisofconsumers'take-awaypurchasessuggestedthattheyweremore
likely to try a different restaurant after a positive experience rather than
repeat it again (Schulz et al., 2019), suggesting that people may also ex-ploretoreduceuncertaintyabouttheirenvironment.Inthesimulation,we
used a stochastic, undirected exploration policy (i.e. e-greedy). However,
CDC could be adapted to use a more sophisticated, directed explorationstrategy, such as uncertainty minimization. This is because CDC considers
exploration and coherency maximization as theoretically and mechan-
isticallyindependent.Understandingwhereandwhenpeopleexploreisan
open question in the literature (for a review, see Hills et al., 2015),
meaning that such adaptations would need to be evaluated with scrutiny.
In the future, we hope to further understand how people trade-off this
need to explore with the desire to coherency maximize.
In this article, we have assumed that preferences are adjusted fol-
lowing a choice. However, preference change has also been shown to
occur “online” during a choice (Akaishi, Kolling, Brown, & Rushworth,
2016;Niv et al., 2015; Schonberg et al., 2014; Voigt, Murawski, Speer,
& Bode,2019).Arecentstudyby (Voigtet al.,2019) foundthatchoice-induced preference changes only occurred for choices that were re-
membered. Both online and post-choice induced preference change
mechanisms could co-exist. Though this would highlight a future area
of development for the CDC model. One such modification would be to
adapt the role of the attention weights during a choice. For example,
their influence could be magnified in cases where the model was more
familiar with or remembered the attributes of the choice. The pre-
ference vectors and attention weights would then account for both
online and post-decisional effects of preference change, respectively.
Although our studies involved brief decision-making episodes, the
basic mechanisms considered here may also apply at longer timescales.
Indeed,thisworkwaspartiallymotivatedbyRieferetal.'s(Rieferetal.,
2017) discovery of self-reinforcing purchasing patterns in supermarket
consumers, which extended over several months. If CDC's predictions
for how preferences change held over extended periods of time, the
practical consequences and possibilities for behavioural change would
be substantial.
For instance, CDC predicts that purchasing the same typeof foodshould increase preference for associated attributes. This can be pro-blematic in cases where the food is unhealthy (e.g., high in sodium or
saturated fat). For example, studies of nutrition have shown that re-
peatedexposuretoaparticularingredient(e.g.,sodium)increasesone's
desire and lowers their sensitivity to it, making it difficult for them to
adjust whentheygoonadiet (Bertino,Beauchamp,&Engelman, 1982;
Mattes, 1993; Liem & de Graaf, 2004). The advent of targeted re-
commender systems means that these cyclical effects may be beingperpetuatedfurther.Whilerecommendersystemsoftenreducediversity
of alternatives in the environment (Pariser, 2011), coherency max-
imization causes preferences to become less diverse, thereby perpetu-
ating the problem. Rather than blindly targeting people based on their
previous consumption, marketers could incorporate external objectives
to their targeting algorithms. For example, our theory predicts that
recommending healthy alternatives that are similar to people's existing
preferences could lead to long-term improvements in their choices.
The modeling approach presented here is readily extended to ac-
count for the richness of people's preferences. Unlike how CDC was
formalized here, people are unlikely to have a single preference across
each respective attribute. For example, while a foodie might prefer
expensive, locally produced foods, they may also be happy to watch
affordable, mass produced television. People may have different pre-
ferences for the same attribute (e.g., cost) depending on context.
Fortunately, it would be straightforward to extend CDC to have mul-
tiple preference vectors to capture this context dependence, similar to
how models of human category learning possess multiple clusters in
which only the most contextually relevant one is updated during a
learning episode (Love et al., 2004). Such a model would cast coher-
ency maximization as a process thatoccurs within a domain (e.g., food,
entertainment, etc.) as opposed to globally.
Themodelpresentedheremayalsobeextendedtoaccountforsome
well-known decision biases. For example, CDC predicts that people will
prefer novel options when they are similar to options that have re-peatedly tried in the past. Thus, it may be able to account for the mere-
exposure effect, where people have been shown to prefer options by
virtue of their familiarity (Zajonc, 1968). Similarly — though only
distantly related to the free choices described here — it is possible that
CDC could be adapted to account for anchoring effects. For example,
forcing CDC to update its preferences towards a given anchor would
cause it to become more favourable towards related options (see atti-
tudinal change accounts of anchoring for related arguments, e.g.,
Wegener, Petty, Detweiler-Bedell, & Jarvis, 2001). While such re-
lationships are speculative at this stage, they indicate a general, co-
herency-driven learning mechanism may underpin several, well-known
sequential choice biases.
In conclusion, preferences and choices can be characterized as ex-
isting within a common space. While we prefer options that match our
preferences, we also appear to engage in error-driven learning to up-
date our preferences to accommodate our past choices. Because pre-
ference and choice representation lie in a shared multidimensional
space, the choices we make have consequences (i.e., spillover effects)
for related future choices. For example, people may be prone to agree
with a controversial opinion held by a political candidate, by virtue of
the fact that they voted for them. Although this behaviour may appear
irrational, being internally coherent may be the best we canhope for in
complex, subjective domains. Being aware of these coherency max-
imizingdynamicsmaymakeitpossibleforpeopletoamelioratesomeof
the potentially harmful consequences. For example, if a voter chooses a
candidate based on tax policy, perhaps being mindful of that fact will
makethevoterlesslikelytoreflexivelyadopttheircandidate'spositions
on unrelated issues. Likewise, these same coherency maximizing prin-
ciples could be incorporated into recommender systems to help con-
sumers achieve some positive goal, such as eating more healthily.A.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Adam N. Hornsby: Conceptualization,Methodology,Software,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft,
Visualization, Writing - review & editing, Resources, Validation.
Bradley C. Love: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing,
Supervision,Projectadministration,Fundingacquisition.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Sébastien Ohleyer, Mina Stojanovic, Gareth
Brown, Olivia Guest, Brett Roads and Sebastian Bobadilla Suarez for
their help and feedback. A. N. H. is supported by Dunnhumby and the
RoyalCommissionfortheExhibitionof1851.B.C.L.issupportedbythe
Royal Society Wolfson Fellowship 1830295, Wellcome Trust Senior
Investigator Award WT106931MA, and National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development Grant 1P01HD080679.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Data will be available at https://osf.io/5bvmp/ after publication.
Code is available at https://github.com/anhornsby/
coherent-representations. A Docker container for replicating
our simulations and statistical analyses will be available at https://
hub.docker.com/r/adamnhornsby/coherent-representations after publication. Supplementary data to this ar-
ticle can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.
104244.
References
Akaishi, R., Kolling, N., Brown, J. W., & Rushworth, M. (2016). Neural mechanisms of
credit assignment in a multicue environment. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(4),
1096–1112. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3159-15.2016.
Akaishi, R., Umeda, K., Nagase, A., & Sakai, K. (2014). Autonomous mechanism of in-
ternal choice estimate underlies decision inertia. Neuron, 81(1), 195–206. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.018.
Alos-Ferrer, C., & Shi, F. (2012). Choice-induced preference change and the free-choice
paradigm: A clarification. SSRN.https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2062507.
Ariely, D., & Norton, M. I. (2008). How actions create – Not just reveal – Preferences.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(1), 13–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2007.10.
008.
Bem, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance
phenomena. Psychological Review, 74(3), 183–200. https://doi.org/10.1037/
h0024835.
Bem, D. J. (1972). In L. Berkowitz (Vol. Ed.), Self-perception theory. Vol. 6. Self-perception
theory(pp. 1–62). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)
60024-6.
Bertino, M., Beauchamp, G. K., & Engelman, K. (1982). Long-term reduction in dietary
sodium alters the taste of salt. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 36(6),
1134–1144. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/36.6.1134.
Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision changes in the desirability of alternatives. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology.. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0041006.
Chammat, M.,Karoui, I. E.,Allali, S., Hagège,J., Lehongre, K., Hasboun,D.,... Naccache,
L. (2017). Cognitive dissonance resolution depends on episodic memory. Scientific
Reports, 7(41320), https://doi.org/10.1038/srep41320.
Chen, M. K., & Risen, J. L. (2010). How choice affects and reflects preferences: Revisiting
the free-choice paradigm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 573–594.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020217.
Cockburn, J., Collins, A. G. E., & Frank, M. J. (2014). A reinforcement learning me-
chanismresponsibleforthevaluationoffreechoice. Neuron, 83(3),551–557. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.06.035.
Crump, M. J. C., McDonnell, J. V., & Gureckis, T. M. (2013). Evaluating amazon’s
Mechanicalturkasatoolforexperimentalbehavioralresearch. PLoS One, 8(3),1–18.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057410.
Cushman, F. (2019). Rationalization is rational. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1–69.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19001730.
Davidson, D., McKinsey, J. C. C., & Suppes, P. (1955). Outlines of a formal theory of
value, i. Philosophy of Science, 22(2), 140–160.
Davis, T., & Love, B. C. (2010). Memory for category information is idealized through
contrast with competing options. Psychological Science, 21(2), 234–242. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797609357712.
Daw, N., & Tobler, P. (2013). Value learning through reinforcement: The basics of dopamine
and reinforcement learning. Elsevierhttps://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-416008-8.
00015-2.
DeSarbo, W.S., & Kim, S. (2012). A review of the major multidimensional scaling models
for the analysis of preference/dominance data in marketing. Quantitative modelling in
marketing and management (pp. 3–25). . https://doi.org/10.1142/
97898144077240001.
Glimcher,P.W.(2009).Chapter32-choice:Towardsastandardback-pocketmodel.InP.
W. Glimcher, C. F. Camerer, E. Fehr, & R. A. Poldrack (Eds.). Neuroeconomics (pp.
503–521). London: Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374176-9.
00032-4.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. MIT Press.
Greenhoff,K.,&MacFie,H.J.H. (1994).Preferencemappinginpractice. Measurement of
food preferences (pp. 137–166). Boston, MA: Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4615-2171-66.
Haidt, J., & Graham, J. (2007, Mar 01). When morality opposes justice: Conservatives
have moral intuitions that liberals may not recognize. Social Justice Research, 20(1),
98–116.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11211-007-0034-z.
Hall, L., Johansson, P., Tärning, B., Sikström, S., & Deutgen, T. (2010). Magic at the
marketplace: Choice blindness for the taste of jam and the smell of tea. Cognition,
117(1), 54–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.06.010.
Hills,T.T.,Todd,P.M.,Lazer,D.,Redish,A.D.,Couzin, I.D.,Group,C.S.R,etal.(2015).
Exploration versus exploitation in space, mind, and society. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 19(1), 46–54.
Hinton, G. E., McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1986). Parallel distributed proces-
sing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 1 In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L.
McClelland,&C.PDPResearchGroup(Eds.)(pp.77–109).Cambridge,MA,USA:MIT
Press.
Hornsby, A., N., Evans, T., Riefer, P., S., Prior, R., & Love, B., C. (2019). Conceptual
Organization is Revealed by Consumer Activity Patterns. Computational Brain and
Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42113-019-00064-9.
Hornsby, A. N., & Love, B. C. (2019). How decisions and the desire for coherency shape
subjective preferences over time. https://osf.io/5bvmp/.
Horton, J., & Chilton, L. (2010). The Labor Economics of Paid Crowdsourcing. CoRR, abs/
1001.0627. https://doi.org/10.1145/1807342.1807376.
Izuma, K., Matsumoto, M., Murayama, K., Samejima, K., Sadato, N., & Matsumoto, K.
(2010). Neural correlates of cognitive dissonance and choice-induced preference
change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(51), 22014–22019.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011879108.
Izuma, K., & Murayama, K. (2013). Choice-induced preference change in the free-choice
paradigm:Acriticalmethodologicalreview. Frontiers in Psychology, 4,41. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00041.
Jost, J., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A., & Sulloway, F. (2003). Political conservatism as mo-
tivated social cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 129(3), 339–375. https://doi.org/10.
1037/0033-2909.129.3.339.
Koster, R., Duzel, E., & Dolan, R. J. (2015). Action and valence modulate choice and
choice induced preference change. PLoS One, 10(3), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0119682.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based connectionist model of category
learning. Psychological Review, 99, 22–44. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.99.
1.22.
Liem, D. G., & de Graaf, C. (2004). Sweet and sour preferences in young children and
adults: Role of repeated exposure. Physiology Behavior, 83(3), 421–429. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2004.08.028.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004). SUSTAIN: A network model of ca-
tegory learning. Psychological Review, 111(2), 309–332. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-295X.111.2.309.
Ma,D.S.,Correll,J.,&Wittenbrink,B.(2015).TheChicagofacedatabase:Afreestimulus
set of facesand normingdata. Behavior Research Methods, 47(4), 1122–1135. https://
doi.org/10.3758/s13428-014-0532-5.
Mandler, G. (1975). Consciousness: Respectable, useful, and probably necessary. Mattes,
R. D. (1993, 03). Fat preference and adherence to a reduced-fat diet. The American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 57(3),373–381. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/57.3.373.
Mattes, R. D. (1993). Fat preference and adherence to a reduced-fat diet. The American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 57(3),373–381. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/57.3.373.
McDuffie, D. (2019). Using amazon’s mechanical turk: Benefits, drawbacks, and sugges-
tions. APS Observer, 32(2).
Mendez, M. F. (2017). A neurology of the conservative-liberal dimension of political
ideology. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 29(2), 86–94.
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.16030051.
Miller, G. A., & Buckhout, R. (1973). Psychology: The science of mental life. Harper & Row.
Miyagi, M., Miyatani, M., & Nakao, T. (2017). Relation between choice-induced pre-
ference change and depression. PLoS One, 12(6), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0180041.
Nakao, T., Kanayama, N., Katahira, K., Odani, M., Ito, Y., Hirata, Y., ... Northoff, G.
(2016). Post response βγpower predicts the degree of choice-based learning in in-
ternally guided decision making. Scientific Reports, 6(August), 1–9. https://doi.org/
10.1038/srep32477.
Nakao, T., Ohira, H., & Northoff, G. (2012). Distinction between externally vs. internally
guided decision-making: Operational differences, meta-analytical comparisons and
their theoretical implications. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 6(31), https://doi.org/10.
3389/fnins.2012.00031.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on
mental processes. Psychological Review, 84(3), 231.
Niv,Y.,Daniel,R.,Geana,A.,Gershman,S.J.,Leong,Y.C.,Radulescu,A.,&Wilson,R.C.A.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244

(2015).Reinforcementlearninginmultidimensionalenvironmentsreliesonattention
mechanisms. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(21), 8145–8157. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2978-14.2015.
Nosofsky, R. M. (2011). The generalized context model: An exemplar model of classifi-
cation. Formal Approaches in Categorization, 18–39.https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511921322.002.
Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the internet is hiding from you. Penguin Group,
The.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K. (2010). The effects of feature-
label order and their implications for symbolic learning. Cognitive Science, 34(6),
909–957. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2009.01092.x.
Rescorla,R.A.,&Wagner,A.R.(1972).Atheoryofpavlovianconditioning:Variationsin
the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. Classical conditioning II:
Current research and theory, 2, 64–99.
Riefer, P. S., Prior, R., Blair, N., Pavey, G., & Love, B. C. (2017). Coherency-maximizing
exploration in the supermarket. Nature Human Behaviour. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-016-0017.
Sauerland, M., Sagana, A., Siegmann, K., Heiligers, D., Merckelbach, H., & Jenkins, R.
(2016). These two are different. Yes, they’re the same: Choice blindness for facial
identity. Consciousness and Cognition, 40, 93–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.
2016.01.003.
Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. Wiley Publications in Statistics.
Schonberg,T.,Bakkour, A.,MHover,A.Mumford,J.Nagar, L.Perez, J.,&A Poldrack,R.
(2014), Changing value through cued approach: An automatic mechanism of beha-
vior change. Nature Neuroscience, 17. doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3673.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997). A neural substrate of prediction and
reward. Science.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.275.5306.1593.
Schulz, E., Bhui, R., Love, B. C., Brier, B., Todd, M. T., & Gershman, S. J. (2019).
Structured, uncertainty-driven exploration in real-world consumer choice.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 201821028. doi:https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1821028116.Sharot,T.,DeMartino,B.,&Dolan,R.J.(2009).Howchoicerevealsandshapesexpected
hedonic outcome. Journal of Neuroscience.. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
4972-08.2009.
Sharot, T., Velasquez, C. M., & Dolan, R. J. (2010). Do decisions shape preference?:
Evidencefromblindchoice. Psychological Science, 21(9),1231–1235. https://doi.org/
10.1177/095679761037923520679522.
Strandberg,T.,Sivén,D.,Hall,L.,Johansson,P.,&Pärnamets,P.(2018).Falsebeliefsand
confabulation can lead to lasting changes in political attitudes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 147(9), 1382–1399. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xge0000489.
Sutton,R.,&Barto,A.(1998).Reinforcementlearning:Anintroduction. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks, 9(5), 1054. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNN.1998.712192.
Vinckier, F., Rigoux, L., Kurniawan, I. T., Hu, C., Bourgeois-Gironde, S., Daunizeau, J., &
Pessiglione, M. (2019). Sour grapes and sweet victories: How actions shape pre-
ferences. PLoS Computational Biology, 15(1), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1006499.
Voigt,K.,Murawski,C.,&Bode,S.(2017).Endogenousformationofpreferences:Choices
systematically change willingness-to-pay for goods. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 43(12), 1872. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xlm0000415.
Voigt, K., Murawski, C., Speer, S., & Bode, S. (2019). Hard decisions shape the neural
coding of preferences. Journal of Neuroscience, 39(4), 718–726. https://doi.org/10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.1681-18.2018.
vonNeumann,J.,Morgenstern,O.,&Rubinstein,A.(1944). Theory of games and economic
behavior (60th anniversary commemorative edition). Princeton University Press.
Wegener, D. T., Petty, R. E., Detweiler-Bedell, B. T., & Jarvis, W. B. G. (2001).
Implications of attitude change theories for numerical anchoring: Anchor plausibility
and the limits of anchor effectiveness. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
37(1), 62–69. https://doi.org/10.1006/jesp.2000.1431.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 9 (2p2), 1 doi:https://doi.org/10.1037/h0025848.A.N. Hornsby and B.C. Love Cognition 200 (2020) 104244
